
--- Page 1 ---
 
 
Examples of Successful Community-Based 
 Public Health Interventions 
 (State-by-State) 
 
The Steps to a HealthierUS (now Healthy Communities program) is a Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) initiative that provides funding to communities to identify and 
improve policies and environmental factors influencing health in order to reduce the burden of 
obesity and other chronic diseases, and to encourage people to become more physically 
active, eat a healthy diet, and not use tobacco.   
 
The Racial and Ethnic Approaches to Community Health Across the U.S. (REACH U.S.) is a 
CDC-funded national program whose goal is to eliminate racial and ethnic health disparities 
in the United States.  In 2007, just 40 communities were funded through the REACH 
program. 
 
These kinds of programs can be cost-effective.  A study by Trust for America’s Health, 
entitled Prevention for a Healthier America, found that investing $10 per person per year in 
proven community-based programs to increase physical activity, improve nutrition, and 
prevent smoking and other tobacco use, could save the country more than $16 billion annually 
within five years.  Out of the $16 billion in savings, Medicare could save more than $5 
billion, Medicaid could save more than $1.9 billion, and private payers could save more than 
$9 billion.   
 
Below are examples of successful community-based interventions that these and other 
primarily publicly-funded programs have supported.  The House tri-committee health reform 
bill and Senate HELP Committee bill, by enhancing our investment in community-based 
prevention, would enable us to expand the reach of successful, evidence based programs, like 
the ones described below. 
 
Alabama: 
 
• In the River Region of Alabama, the Steps trained diabetes wellness advocates to help 
diabetics set wellness goals and manage their condition.  From 2004-2007, emergency 
room visits among participants decreased more than 50 percent. 
 
• The Alabama REACH 2010 Breast and Cervical Cancer Coalition (ABCCC) created a 
community action plan to address the barriers than prevent African American women over 

--- Page 2 ---
 
2
40 from receiving breast and cervical cancer screenings. The plan created a core working 
group of volunteers and health professionals, awarded grants to non-profit groups that 
targeted screenings, conducted outreach activities, and distributed educational materials. 
Within 2 years after instituting the plan, 14% more women participating in the 
intervention reported having a mammogram.  Additionally, 11% more women reported 
receiving a Pap test within 2 years of the intervention. A patient navigation system was 
launched in eight counties to address a significant black/white gap in mammography 
screening.  As a result, the gap has now been eliminated in several counties, and has been 
reduced by 76% across the 8-county region. 
 
• In 2006, the Jefferson County (AL) Department of Health began a program to encourage 
all food establishments to go smoke free.  The program was first attempted by the reward 
system. JCDH gave a plaque and door sticker for all establishments that voluntarily 
banned smoking through out the establishment.  After a period of time had passed the 
Board of Health authorized our food inspectors to deduct 4 points from their food 
inspection score for allowing smoking in any part of the facility and each smoking facility 
had to post a public health warning sticker on the facility door that management allows 
smoking in the facility.  When the program began 65.4% of food establishments were 
smoke free. After the voluntary phase the number rose to 70% and after the penalty phase 
the number rose to 93.9%. Today the percentage of non smoking food establishments is 
approximately 97%. 
 
 
Alaska: 
 
• Rates of tobacco use, both cigarettes and spit, have historically been higher in Alaska than 
in the rest of the nation. To address this health problem, the Alaska Department of Health 
and Social Services has implemented a comprehensive tobacco control program based 
upon CDC’s Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs—2007. 
Program components include countermarketing, community-based programs, youth and 
school programs, eliminating exposure to secondhand smoke, eliminating health 
disparities, cessation, a free quitline, and evaluation.  Thousands of Alaskans have called 
the quitline since it was established in 2002, and a 2007 study documented a 40% quit 
rate.  Alaska has seen progress as a result of its efforts.  Data from the 2008 Alaska 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System showed a significant reduction in tobacco 
use. The percentage of adult smokers in Alaska has declined by one-fifth since 1996 to 
21.5% in 2007. This figure represents more than 27,000 fewer smokers and is expected to 
result in almost 8,000 fewer tobacco-related deaths and $300 million in averted medical 
costs. 
 
• The Alaska Department of Health & Social Services awarded a grant using Preventive 
Health and Health Services Block Grant funds to the Central Peninsula General Hospital 
(CPGH) to implement a free walking program. Patients from the cardiac rehabilitation, 
diabetes education, and other hospital programs were invited to participate.  Each 
participant promised to work toward walking 10,000 steps per day; keep a daily step 
record; submit step, weight and blood pressure reports; and attend quarterly program 
events and screenings. Participants were given step counters and instructions for use.  

--- Page 3 ---
 
3
Program participants walked 304,336,058 steps, equivalent to 152,168 miles, by the end 
of the first year; half of the participants completed the 10,000 Steps program; nearly two-
thirds of participants who reported results lost weight, contributing to a group loss of 766 
pounds; and sixty-two percent of participants reporting said they are now exercising for at 
least 30 minutes on three or more days each week. 
 
 
Arizona:  
 
• Challenging College Alcohol Abuse (CCAA) is a social norms and environmental 
management program aimed at reducing high-risk drinking and related negative 
consequences among college students (18 to 24 years old). The intervention was 
developed at the University of Arizona based on work previously done at Northern Illinois 
University. CCAA uses a campus-based media campaign and other strategies to address 
misperceptions about alcohol and make the campus environment less conducive to 
drinking. Over 3 years of implementing CCAA at the university (1995 to 1998), the 
percentage of surveyed freshmen who reported having five or more drinks per occasion at 
least once in the last 2 weeks decreased from 43% to 31% (p < .01), and the percentage of 
surveyed freshmen who reported using alcohol three or more times per week in the past 
year decreased from 22% to 17% (p < .05). 
 
Arkansas: 
 
• Arkansas has made significant progress in advancing community water fluoridation with a 
cooperative agreement from CDC. In 1999, prior to receiving CDC support, Arkansas had 
a one-person state oral health program, and only 49% of the state’s population was 
receiving the benefits of water fluoridation. With the help of the CDC funding, Arkansas 
now monitors its fluoridation systems monthly using the Water Fluoridation Reporting 
System (WFRS) and has improved coordination within state government.  Training is 
being provided to water plant operators, and a state-wide community educational 
campaign on water fluoridation has been launched. Called “Got teeth? Get fluoride!” the 
campaign was developed to encourage additional communities to consider implementing 
water fluoridation.  Through these efforts, 62% of the Arkansas population on community 
water systems now receives the benefits of community water fluoridation.  Arkansas, 
through the CDC funding, also is strengthening its capacity to monitor oral diseases, 
develop and implement a state oral health plan, and develop additional collaborative 
partnerships through an oral health coalition. 
 
California: 
 
• The YMCA of Santa Clara Valley and the Steps Program worked together on a number of 
activities including: a school lunch walking campaign at six schools; family nights 
offering physical activities and healthy recipes at six schools; a YMCA Healthy Kids Day 
in which local resources and health providers introduced families to wellness concepts; a 
YMCA 5K; and a reduced rate YMCA family membership.  The program also helped 
sustain efforts made under a Carole M. White PEP grant to the district, as 81 percent of 

--- Page 4 ---
 
4
students who could not pass a fitness gram in the fall passed in the spring.  Fifty-one 
percent of families surveyed said they increased family physical activity, and 425 families 
reported they were practicing healthier eating.  
 
• The Immunize LA Kids Coalition, which was funded by the CDC during the REACH 
2010 initiative, implemented a community action plan with culturally appropriate 
interventions that seek to overcome barriers to immunization by working to improve 
practices in health care provider settings. They also strove to provide reminders for 
parents about immunizations.  By April 2006, 82% of WIC clients in the service area were 
up to date with recommended immunizations at age 2. 
 
• Healthy Eating, Active Communities (HEAC) was created by the California Endowment 
to reduce disparities in obesity and diabetes by improving food and physical fitness 
environments for school-age children. HEAC seeks to bring healthy changes to schools, 
afterschool programs, the heath care sector, local neighborhoods, and marketing and 
advertising practices. All school districts in HEAC areas improved their physical 
education curricula, and as a result, students report more activity throughout the day.  
Survey data also show that students are consuming fewer servings of chips, candy, and 
soft drinks during the school day, and they aren’t eating more of these unhealthy products 
at home. Generally, there’s about a ~7% increase in self-reported activity and a ~4% 
reduction in unhealthy food consumption. 
 
• In 2006, a small group of local mothers—many of them Spanish-speaking farm workers—
formed a local walking group (Greenfield Walking Group (Bakersfield, CCROPP) to 
improve their fitness levels and connect with friends and neighbors. They met at a nearby 
park, which was poorly lit and littered with used hypodermic needles and broken bottles. 
The paths were so cracked and run down that they were impossible to navigate with a 
baby stroller, effectively rendering them unusable for new mothers. The Walking Group 
organized, inviting police, parks officials, and other community leaders to walk the park 
with them, so they could see and understand the extent of the problem. Ultimately, the 
local Chamber of Commerce agreed to support park improvements and more than 100 
volunteers installed a new walking path in a single day. The Greenfield Walking Group is 
now a community institution. Several members have experienced significant weight loss 
(up to 80 pounds) and report significant improvements in their personal health and quality 
of life. (funded by CDC) 
 
• South Los Angeles is a classic “food desert,” where fast food outlets and junk food filled 
convenience stores dominate the local retail environment, and full service supermarkets 
and farmers markets are rare. Six local high students decided to something about it—one 
store at a time (South Los Angeles Corner-Store Conversions (South LA, HEAC)).  The 
students persuaded local market owners to make over their stores, showcasing healthy 
snacks like oranges and bananas and pushing chips and soda to the back.  The students 
documented their success in a series of short videos, collectively titled, Where Do I Get 
My Five?  The students grew into local advocates and were instrumental in helping to pass 
a local fast food moratorium through the Los Angeles City Council, which imposed a 
temporary ban on new fast food restaurants in the area.  
 

--- Page 5 ---
 
5
• Community Health Councils’ African Americans Building a Legacy of Health coalition in 
Los Angeles has improved food and physical activity options in South Los Angeles.  The 
Los Angeles City Council adopted an ordinance to limit the proliferation of fast food 
restaurants and to provide incentives to healthy food retailers to encourage them to locate 
in disadvantaged areas, opening the way for two new stores. The L.A. County Board of 
Supervisors adopted a policy to improve the quality of food offered in county-sponsored 
programs.  The Coalition also worked to preserve a local community fitness center slated 
for closure and transferred program management to the Los Angeles YMCA in addition to 
providing seed funding to more than 43 community-based fitness programs.  More than 
2,270 individuals participated in the activities offered through the coalition’s mini-grant 
program. During a two year period, 540 participants completed self-reported surveys. 
 70% (n=377) of participants reported either the same or an increase in consumption of 
fruits/vegetables eaten from the previous day; 60% (n=326) of participants reported either 
the same or an increase in number of days in a week engaged in physical activity; 69% 
(n=372) of participants reported either the same or decrease in BMI. 
 
• California launched its new Tobacco Control Program in 1989, with its comprehensive 
approach reducing adult smoking significantly.  Adult smoking declined by 35 percent 
from 1988 to 2007, from 22.7 percent to 13.8 percent.  If every state had California’s 
current smoking rate, there would be almost 14 million fewer smokers in the United 
States. Between Fiscal Year 1989-90 and Fiscal Year 2006-07, per capita cigarette 
consumption in California declined by 61 percent, compared to just 41 percent for the 
country as a whole, during this same time period. Between 1988 and 2004, lung and 
bronchus cancer rates in California declined at 3.8 times the rate of decline as the rest of 
the U.S.  Researchers have associated these declines with California’s program.   
 
• During 2000-2004, the Vietnamese REACH for Health Initiative (VRHI) Coalition 
implemented a cervical cancer action plan that included a multimedia campaign, outreach 
by lay health workers, a Pap test registry and reminder system, along with other 
interventions. Results of the program showed that 47.7% of participants who had never 
had a Pap test received one after meeting with a lay health worker.  Additionally, 52.1% 
of participants had a repeat Pap test within 18 months. 
 
• During 2004-2007, the Vietnamese REACH for Health Initiative (VRHI) Coalition 
implemented a breast cancer action plan that included a multimedia campaign, outreach 
by lay health workers, along with other interventions. Results of the program showed that 
17.9% of participants received a mammogram and 27.9% received a clinical breast exam 
after meeting with a lay health worker, compared with 3.9% and 5.1%, respectively, of 
women who did not meet with a lay health worker. 
 
• Established under a Healthy Tomorrows Partnership for Children program grant (from the 
American Academy of Pediatrics and the federal Health Resources and Services 
Administration), the San Diego County Children’s Dental Health Initiative began with a 
community needs assessment which highlighted the high numbers of uninsured children 
and the significance of dental care needs.  A collaboration of public and private 
organizations, the initiative was the first Healthy Tomorrows dental grant and facilitated 
the incorporation of oral health into various medical programs.  Delivering emergency 

--- Page 6 ---
 
6
dental care through a network of over 300 volunteer dental providers, the program 
provided dental health services to 1900 children and sealant treatments to an additional 
2200.  Today, the program continues to impact 10,000 youth per year via outreach 
activities alone. 
 
• The California Department of Public Health instituted the California Asthma Public 
Health Initiative to improve the quality of clinical care according to National Asthma 
Education and Prevention Program (NAEPP) guidelines, reduce asthma morbidity and 
improve quality of life, and reduce/eliminate asthma health disparities for California 
children aged 0-18 years with asthma.  Strategies included training and support of a 
fulltime clinic-based asthma coordinator; continuous quality improvement strategies in the 
clinic; and community outreach to promote and disseminate these best practices.  Among 
the outcomes, the study found over a three year period a 76% reduction in hospitalizations 
due to asthma; a 78% reduction in emergency department visits due to asthma; and a 73% 
reduction in the number of children who used rescue medication more than twice a week.   
 
• Forever Free is a drug treatment program for women who abuse drugs and are 
incarcerated at the California Institution for Women, a female-only State prison in 
Riverside County, California, since 1991.  The intervention aims to reduce drug use and 
improve behaviors of women during incarceration and while they are on parole. While 
they are incarcerated, women participate in individual substance abuse counseling, special 
workshops, educational seminars, 12-step programs, parole planning, and urine testing. 
After graduation and discharge to parole, women may voluntarily enter community 
residential treatment. Residential treatment services include individual and group 
counseling. Some women also participate in family counseling, vocational 
training/rehabilitation, and recreational or social activities.  In a study of outcomes for 180 
women 1 year after their release from prison, 8% of Forever Free participants reported 
drug use in the past 30 days, compared with 32% of the comparison group (p = .001). A 
total of 50.5% of Forever Free participants reported any drug use in the past year, 
compared with 76.5% of comparison group participants (p = .001). In one study, 68.4% of 
Forever Free graduates who entered residential treatment had not returned to custody 1 
year after release on parole; 52.2% of Forever Free graduates who did not enter residential 
treatment had not returned to custody, while only 27.2% of women in a no-treatment 
comparison group had not been returned to custody (p < .05). In a second study, 49.5% of 
Forever Free graduates compared with 74.7% of a no-treatment comparison group 
reported being arrested in the year following release from prison (p = .001). 
 
 
Colorado: 
 
• The REACH project in New Mexico and Colorado worked with the Ramah Band of 
Navajo Indians to create partnerships between tribal health programs, tribal leaders and 
nontribal groups to address the rising incidence of breast and cervical cancer among 
American Indian women.  The project developed Mammography Days and transported 
women to the nearest hospital, about 45 miles away.  As a result, 130 women received 
mammograms for the first time in their lives.  Tribal health care providers also received 

--- Page 7 ---
 
7
training in public health topics, cancer screening techniques, and surveillance methods to 
improve their patient care. 
 
• LiveWell Colorado is a statewide initiative aimed at reducing overweight and obesity 
rates and related chronic diseases in Colorado. LiveWell Colorado works with community 
initiatives, such as LiveWell Colorado Commerce City, to promote equal opportunities for 
healthy eating and active living through policies, programs and environmental changes. 
Around 450 youth and adults (2% of the Commerce City population) are involved in 
relatively intensive cooking classes and other educational programs that might be 
expected to produce measurable behavior change. Another 1200 people (4% of the 
population) have come to one-time events such as walkability assessments or been 
contacted by LWCC outreach specialists. One third (34%) of the 330 respondents from 
Commerce City reported eating five or more servings of fruits and vegetables each day, 
and 38% were meeting the recommended levels of physical activity. 
 
• CDC funded Colorado’s Oral Health Unit to develop a state plan, convene a statewide 
coalition, and develop community prevention efforts. State officials also are working to 
provide sealants to all Colorado children at greatest risk for tooth decay. In 2009, the Oral 
Health Unit will expand its Be Smart & Seal Them! program to include all urban schools 
with a student population of 50% or more who qualify for the federal free or reduced 
lunch program and rural school districts that serve families with a median income at or 
below 235% of the federal poverty level.  During the 2007–2008 school year, more than 
1,200 schoolchildren in Denver were screened for dental problems, and 971 received 
sealants. Children in rural areas received preventive services, such as sealants and fluoride 
varnish, as well as other dental treatments. Many of these children had never seen a dental 
provider before. (CDC. Oral Health: Preventing Cavities, Gum Disease, and Tooth Loss.) 
 
Washington, D.C.: 
 
• In an effort to combat the rise in childhood obesity, the Choosing Healthy and Rewarding 
Meals (CHARM) School Program was developed to address adolescents in one of 
Washington, DC’s most underserved communities.  Through a series of classes covering 
topics ranging from healthy cooking to physical activity, the CHARM School led to 
changes in self-reported consumption of fruits, vegetables, and fast food while decreasing 
the number of hours of TV watched by the 81 participating youth.  These successes 
occurred in the context of enhancing access to a pediatric medical home. 
 
• The D.C. Department of Health developed the Diabetes for Life Learning Center in 
collaboration with the District of Columbia Public Library System, the Department of 
Health Diabetes Prevention and Control Program and a local health care organization 
(Washington Hospital Center).  The program began in response to the need for improving 
the self management skills of people with diabetes and providing peer support in a safe, 
easy to access community space. The Center provides structured diabetes education, an 
ongoing diabetes support group, medical lab tests for blood sugar and learning resources.  
Participants in a follow-up group showed improvements in blood sugar control.  In 
addition, A1C control increased by 16 percent (p =<.001); participants systolic and 

--- Page 8 ---
 
8
diastolic blood pressure levels dropped an average of 8 percent (p=<.057); and ER visits 
dropped 5.4 percent (p=<.0043). 
Florida: 
• The Coalition to Reduce HIV (funded by CDC) designed an intervention to reduce the 
transmission of HIV in young adults in the African American, Caribbean, and Hispanic 
communities in the 12 Florida ZIP codes with the highest numbers of HIV cases. 
Strategies of the coalition included outreach to residents, businesses, and community 
leaders; efforts to educated individuals and mobilize communities; and efforts to build 
capacity for community groups and enhance the public health infrastructure. As a result, 
the percentage of self-reported sex without condoms declined from 26.3% in 2001 to 
21.5% in 2005 among the project’s target population.  Among the Caribbean population, 
self-reported condom use at least once in the past year increased steadily from 51.8% in 
2001 to 65.8% in 2005. 
• The Steps Program in Pinellas County, Florida, implemented a program in schools to 
increase fruit and vegetable consumption, and a local vegetable distributor set up farmers’ 
markets on school grounds.  More than 3,700 students and staff increased their fruit and 
vegetable intake, and 84 percent of schools and 90 percent of their students and staff are 
participating in the farmers’ markets.  In 2007, the school district was rated first in the 
nation among large school districts on the Physicians Committee for Responsible 
Medicine’s School Lunch Report Card.  
Georgia: 
• The REACH for Wellness program works to improve cardiovascular health of Atlanta 
Renewal Community residents and to eliminate health disparities among minority groups. 
The program offers free, community-based services such as nutrition education classes, 
physical activity programs, and empowerment groups. Results of the program include a 
decrease in the percentage of African American adults who currently smoke from 25.8% 
in 2002 to 20.8% in 2004. Over the two years, 10.1% more adults reported having their 
blood cholesterol level checked and medication adherence among adults with high blood 
pressure also increased. Additionally, the percentage of adults who are not physically 
active decreased from 32.6% in 2002 to 30.6% in 2004. 
 
• The Georgia Stroke and Heart Attack Prevention Program provides services to low 
income patients with high blood pressure.  Patients receive intense monitoring, health 
assessments, and lifestyle counseling and treatment that are based on established protocols 
for blood pressure treatment and on the essential elements of health care described in the 
Chronic Care Model.  Prescribed medicines are provided at low or no cost. Nurse case-
managers monitor blood pressure, encourage regular clinic visits, and work with patients 
to help them take their medicine regularly.  Program participants had better blood pressure 
control, lower treatment costs for those who received treatment, and lower overall costs 
per eligible patient according to an evaluation funded by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.  The rate of expected adverse events such as heart attack or stroke was 
reduced by half in program participants, compared to people who received no preventive 

--- Page 9 ---
 
9
care. When compared to patients receiving usual care, the rate was cut by slightly less 
than half.  For the 15,000 patients in the Stroke and Heart Attack Prevention Program 
costs were an average of $138 less per patient annually, compared with the cost of usual 
care.   
Idaho: 
• The Idaho Diabetes Prevention and Control Program (DPCP) provided expertise, staff 
time, and financial support to create the Diabetes Preventive Heathcare Collaborative in 
partnership with the Medicare Quality Improvement Organization for Idaho, Qualis 
Health.  Teams of health care professionals from fourteen medical practices and clinics 
with more than 3,700 diabetes patients learned how to improve health care delivery for 
their patients using computerized clinical information registries, implementing clinical 
practice recommendations, and using a proven model to guide diabetes care.  A measure 
of blood sugar control, called hemoglobin A1c, improved from 72% at baseline to 78% at 
follow-up after training sessions, a significant improvement; percentage of patients with 
an acceptable blood pressure reading improved by more than thirty percent at follow-up; 
and percentage of patients with a documented self-management goal tripled. 
Illinois: 
• Founded by a group of medical students in 1984, the Chicago Youth Program (CYP) 
serves children and youth living in inner-city Chicago, and area where 65% of families 
with children live below the Federal Poverty Level.  In addition to serving as the medical 
home for youth, CYP provides a myriad of social services.  The Healthy Tomorrows grant 
provided by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the federal Health Resources and 
Services Administration supported the development of the Parent Run Evening Preschool 
(PREP) program, intended to prepare children for school while simultaneously teaching 
their mothers parenting skills to enhance self esteem.  The program was met with 
widespread success, boasting a 77.5% overall program retention rate for participants.  
Youth in PREP had a 95% graduation rate, compared with 51% in surrounding areas, an 
over 75% college/trade school placement rate, and lower teen birth rates compared to the 
general population.  Following the pilot, PREP was expanded to 4 additional sites and 
continues to serve Chicago’s at-risk youth today. 
 
• Chicago Department of Health, REACH/Lawndale Health Promotion Project offers health 
education classes to increase residents’ awareness about risk factors for diabetes and heart 
disease, such as high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, obesity, smoking, unhealthy 
eating habits, and lack of regular physical activity. More than 7,000 assessments for 
diabetes and heart disease risk have been conducted with community residents. Nine 
hundred residents were referred to local health agencies for medical care.  In addition, 350 
residents with diabetes or heart disease received case management services, which sharply 
increased the use of health screenings.  
 
• The Illinois Department of Health (IDPH) trained teams to use the evidence-based 
Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) Program to improve student eating and 
physical activity behaviors.  Participating schools received a $5,000 grant from IDPH to 

--- Page 10 ---
 
10
implement the curriculum, purchase necessary equipment and promote activities and 
program philosophy.  Each school completes the School Health Index, a Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention tool that helps schools identify strengths and weaknesses 
in existing health programs and develop action plans and wellness policies for improving 
students’ health.  Follow-up evaluation shows that students in CATCH physical education 
classes are more active during class time. Moderate to vigorous physical activity during 
class increased by 32 percent and the time students were very active during class more 
than doubled. 
Kentucky: 
• The Kentucky Departments for Public Health and Medicaid Services and the University of 
Louisville Department of Family and Geriatric Medicine and local health departments 
partnered to provide the Chronic Disease Self-Management Program developed by the 
Stanford University Patient Education Research Center to patients in community settings 
such as senior centers, churches, libraries and hospitals.  Trained facilitators implement 
this free, highly interactive program, in mixed groups of people with a variety of chronic 
health problems, focusing on building skills, sharing experiences, and providing support.  
Evaluation studies at Stanford and the University of Louisville showed that patients in this 
program spent fewer days in the hospital, with a trend toward fewer outpatient visits and 
hospital admissions, yielding savings of about ten times the program cost. 
 
• The Kentucky Diabetes Prevention and Control Program, Heart Disease and Stroke 
Program, Immunization Program, along with the Kentucky Primary Care Association, 
Diabetes Network Health Plan Partners, National Diabetes Education Program, and the 
Association of American Medical Colleges Academic Chronic Care Collaboratives 
partnered to develop and conduct annual educational sessions for Kentucky healthcare 
collaborative members. The educational sessions review successes and challenges in 
translating evidenced-based guidelines into practice as well as provide new information 
that health care practitioners need. The most recent sessions reached participants from all 
but three of the sixteen Kentucky collaborative sites.  As a result, more of the high risk 
population is getting improved diabetes care and reducing their risk of death and serious 
complications. Trends tracked by the collaboratives show that rates of dilated eye exams, 
patient self monitoring of blood sugar, foot exams, influenza and pneumonia vaccinations 
and visits to a health care professional for diabetes care all improved since the 
establishment of the collaboratives and the training sessions. 
Maine: 
• 
In 1997, Maine established a comprehensive tobacco prevention program known as the 
Partnership for a Tobacco-Free Maine.  Prior to launching this effort, Maine had one of 
the highest youth smoking rates in the country.  Now, it has one of the lowest. Smoking 
among Maine’s high school students declined a dramatic 64 percent between 1997 and 
2007, falling from 39.2 percent to 14 percent (nationally, smoking among high school 
students declined by 45 percent over this same time period). The Maine Department of 
Health (DOH) has calculated that, as a result of these declines, there are now more than 
26,000 fewer youth smokers in Maine and more than 14,000 youth will be saved from 

--- Page 11 ---
 
11
premature, smoking-caused deaths. Based on estimates that smokers, on average, have 
$16,000 more in lifetime health care costs than non-smokers, the DOH calculated that 
these declines will save Maine more than $416 million in long-term health care costs.   
 
• 
The Maine Cardiovascular Health Program developed a project to help Maine workplaces 
implement low- or no-cost, easy to apply policy and environmental change strategies that 
specifically apply to the many Maine workplaces with small numbers of employees.  
Initial work with partners such as wellness councils, the Chamber of Commerce and other 
employer and public health groups provided experience to support expanding this pilot to 
additional workplaces. The project developed the Good Work! Resource Kit which 
highlights information on the link between employee health and the business ‘bottom 
line,’ as well as key strategies.  A sample of successes for just two participating 
employers: 
o The University of Maine at Augusta has seen a dramatic increase in the number of 
employees participating in health-related activities such as walking groups and 
weight control groups, and reports blood pressures, cholesterol levels, and weights 
are down. 
o At Millinocket Hospital, almost half the employees achieved the walking goal of 
10,000 steps a day, accumulating 14,850,875 steps altogether. 
 
Maryland: 
 
• 
The National Center for Healthy Housing in Columbia, Maryland, is using support from 
the Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota Foundation to demonstrate how green 
building principles can improve health. The center is tracking the health impact of the 
green renovation of an affordable 60-unit apartment complex in Worthington, Minnesota. 
Residents are primarily low-income minority families employed in the food processing 
industry. Results of this project can inform local zoning decisions and building codes. 
This is the first time the effect of green building principles will be measured against health 
outcomes over time. Early results include a majority of adults and children reporting 
improved health in just one year post-renovation. The adults made large, statistically 
significant improvements in general health, chronic bronchitis, hay fever, sinusitis, 
hypertension, and asthma. The children made great strides in general health, respiratory 
allergies, and ear infections. Overall, there were improvements in comfort, safety, and 
ease of housecleaning. For more information, visit: www.nchh.org.1 
 
• 
The Latino Health Initiative of Montgomery County, Maryland and its health promotion 
program, Vías de la Salud, and the Montgomery County Advanced Practice Center for 
Public Health Emergency Preparedness and Response (Montgomery APC), a program of 
the Montgomery County Health Department, in collaboration with the University of 
Maryland, School of Medicine—developed, implemented, and assessed a cultural and 
linguistic intervention to increase the awareness, knowledge, and practices of emergency 
preparedness among the low-income Latino community. This intervention included the 
development of a training curriculum, the training of health promotion specialists, and 
conducting community-based education sessions.   Over a two month period, teams of 
                                                 
1 Cohen L, Iton A, Davis R, Rodriguez S. Prevention Institute.  A Time of Opportunity: Local Solutions to 
Reduce Inequities in Health and Safety. May 2009. 

--- Page 12 ---
 
12
Vías promoters conducted two pilot interventions at two collaborating community 
agencies that serve Latinos. At each site, the promoters held educational sessions 
addressing “What is an Emergency?” and the three steps of emergency preparedness 
(initiate a conversation about emergencies; develop a family emergency plan; and prepare 
an emergency supply kit of nine essential items).   This intervention resulted in the 
following:  
o Increased perception of participants that their families were prepared to deal with 
an emergency situation (from 8% at the pre-test to 69% at the post-test);  
o Increased engagement in emergency preparedness activities—on the final post-test, 
100% of participants reported to have discussed with their families about 
emergencies and the need to develop an emergency plan (compared to 23% and 
33% respectively, on the pre-test);  
o More than 90% of participants reported to have stored water, food, and other 
supplies at the final post-test;  
o Participants reported that they found the sessions to be interesting, valuable, clear, 
and motivating; and  
o Several participants indicated the need to inquire about the emergency plan at their 
children’s schools, and to consider medication for chronic illnesses when planning 
for an emergency.  
Massachusetts: 
• The REACH 2010 Latino Health Project works to raise people’s awareness about 
diabetes, teach them how to eat a healthy diet and be more physically active, and help 
them to understand that diabetes can be prevented and controlled. Outreach is provided 
through local health education centers, community groups, health care providers, and a 
media campaign. In 2006, the percentage of participants with total cholesterol levels 
<200mg/dL increased from 75% to 80%. In addition, the percentage of Latinos receiving 
services at the Greater Lawrence Family Health Center who reached their blood sugar 
goal (A1C level <7) increased from 20.7% in 2002 to 43.4% in 2006. Finally, the 
percentage of Latinos receiving services at the GLFHC who had an annual flu shot 
increased from 44.2% in 2005 to 55% in 2006. (funded by CDC) 
 
• Funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Shape Up Somerville: Eat 
Smart. Play Hard, was a 3-year (2002-2005), environmental change intervention designed 
to prevent obesity in culturally diverse, high-risk, early-elementary school children. The 
Shape Up team developed and implemented strategies designed to create energy balance 
for 1st-3rd graders in Somerville. In before-, during-, and after-school environments, 
interventions were focused on increasing the number of physical activity options available 
to children throughout the day and on improving dietary choices. The program included 
improved nutrition in schools, a school health curriculum, an after-school curriculum, 
parent and community outreach, collaboration with community restaurants, school nurse 
education, and a safe routes to school program. After one year, on average the program 
reduced one pound of weight gain over 8 months for an 8 year old child. On a population 
level, this reduction in weight gain would translate into large numbers of children moving 
out of the overweight category and reducing their risk for chronic disease later in life. 
(Economos CD, Hyatt RR, Goldberg JP, Must A, Naumova EN, Collins JJ, Nelson ME. 

--- Page 13 ---
 
13
2007. A Community Intervention Reduces BMI z-Score in Children: Shape Up 
Somerville First Year Results. Obesity 15(5):1325-1336.) 
 
• After identifying a cluster of salmonella cases among residents of Boston’s Chinese 
communities the Boston Public Health Commission developed a culturally competent 
survey to conduct the investigation.  The survey identified live poultry markets in Boston 
as a potential source of this cluster.  Inspections by USDA, Massachusetts Food Safety 
Program, and Boston Inspectional Services identified a number of unsafe practices that 
could have contributed to the illnesses.  The outbreak strain of salmonella was narrowed 
down to the live bird market. These findings have resulted in improvements in retail 
practices in Boston’s live poultry markets.  In addition, this investigation identified high 
risk food handling practices in the Chinese community.  A food safety summit with 
community members identified knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs related food safety and 
resulted in a recommendation for a food safety video for the this community.  The Boston 
Public Health Commission produced a food safety video that is now available in both 
Cantonese and Mandarin. 
Michigan: 
• The REACH Detroit Partnership conducts interventions to help residents prevent and 
manage diabetes through health education classes and bilingual health information. The 
Family Intervention targeted two groups. In the first group, the percentage of participants 
with blood sugar levels >7 dropped 13.5%. In the second group, participants were divided 
into two subgroups, with one receiving interventions immediately and the other receiving 
interventions 6 months later. Participants in subgroup 1 showed a mean decrease of 1.2 in 
the blood sugar levels, compared with 0.02 for subgroup 2.  Subgroup 1 participants also 
showed improvements in diabetes-related depression and consumption of high-fat foods.  
 
• The Michigan Cancer Consortium (MCC), a statewide partnership of public and private 
organizations, including the Michigan Department of Health, made reduced youth 
smoking a priority seven years ago.  Partners in the Consortium contributed their time, 
experience and expertise to change policies at local and state levels to: reduce sales of 
cigarettes to minors; increase smoke-free regulations and ordinances in schools and 
childcare centers; limit tobacco billboard advertising.  At the start of this program, 35% of 
Michigan youth smoked.  The Michigan youth smoking rate has dropped to 23% since 
reduced youth smoking became a priority of the Consortium. Because of its success, MCC 
has set a new goal to lower the youth smoking rate to 16% by 2010. 
Minnesota: 
• The Minnesota Arthritis Program, with funding from CDC, is partnering with the 
Elderberry Institute Living at Home Block Nurse Program, which delivers community 
services that help older adults remain at home as long as possible.  This partnership 
allowed the arthritis program to significantly expand the reach of self-management 
education and exercise program across the state.  For example, the number of new 
participants in the Arthritis Foundation Self-Help Program increased 229% in 2006.  The 

--- Page 14 ---
 
14
number of new participants in the Arthritis Foundation Exercise Program increased 125%. 
These programs are now available in 50 of the state’s 87 counties.  
 
• Opening in March 2008, the Sabathani Community Center is a non-for-profit community 
organization in Minneapolis with the mission of building community capacity and 
strengthening youth, children, and families.  The center provides much-needed social 
services, as well as adult, dental, and now pediatric primary care.  Since receiving a 
Community Access To Child Health (CATCH) Program grant from the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, the pediatric clinic has served over 100 children, providing 
immunizations to more than 50% of patients and screening nearly 1/3 for lead toxicity.  
The clinic continues to succeed in delivering health care to Minneapolis children who 
need it the most.   
 
• The Hennepin County Human Services and Public Health Department has implemented a 
Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program for pregnant women.  This program builds upon 
the basic guidelines established by CDC and the Minnesota Department of Health (MDH). 
The program provides guidance, education, and support to women who are pregnant and 
surface antigen positive for hepatitis B. The Public Health Nurse Coordinator works 
directly with the pregnant woman to provide case management, but also coordinates care 
among various medical providers, public assistance staff, and community agencies to 
ensure access to services.  The program's success can be measured in vaccine and 
serology completion rates for infants rising from 92% in 2002 to an all-time high of 100% 
in 2007. The rates of mothers referred to liver specialists for follow-up during pregnancy 
increased from 20% in 2002 to 75% in 2007. 
Missouri: 
• The Missouri Diabetes Prevention and Control Program, part of the Missouri Health 
Department, facilitates and funds the Missouri Diabetes Collaborative.  Collaborative 
members form practice teams to improve their care of patients with diabetes using a 
proven model to manage disease.  Patient registries, proven treatment services, 
cooperation among healthcare providers, and referrals to community resources for follow-
up are just some of the tools that help Collaborative members provide improved care.  
Fourteen measures of patient diabetes care in the group of collaborative patients have 
improved. For example, a measure of blood sugar control called HbA1c decreased an 
average of more than 3%. For every one-percent reduction in this value, there is an 
estimated 35% decrease in eye, kidney and nerve damage, and a 25% decrease in 
diabetes-related deaths. Also, more patients are receiving foot exams (17%) and eye 
exams (32%), helping prevent amputations and blindness.  
 
• The Missouri Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention Program, funded by CDC’s Division 
of Heart Disease & Stroke, worked with the state Office of Primary Care & Rural Health, 
the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services and local health departments to create a 
statewide registry of automated external defibrillators (AEDs), allowing emergency 
responders to quickly locate an AED when needed.  This group also developed a strategic 
plan for placing additional AEDs in rural counties where they were not readily available 
and trained first responders to use them.  Federal Office of Rural Health funding allowed 

--- Page 15 ---
 
15
the distribution of approximately 400 AEDs over a two-year period to qualifying first 
response agencies.  In just 12 months, 39 emergencies required the use of these AEDs 
saving 9 lives. 
Nebraska: 
• CDC’s WISEWOMAN program started in 2000, and its mission is to provide low-
income, under- or uninsured 40- to 64-year-old women with the knowledge, skills, and 
opportunities to improve diet, physical activity, and other lifestyle behaviors to prevent, 
delay and control cardiovascular and other chronic diseases. The WISEWOMAN program 
as a whole has reduced the risk of heart disease, stroke, and other chronic diseases in over 
84,000 women.  In Nebraska, the program provides risk factor screenings to low-income 
women at clinics throughout Nebraska and refers women at-risk of heart attack or stroke 
to experts for additional counseling and care.  Nebraska WISEWOMAN has screened 
over 19,000 underserved women since its inception in 2000 and has significantly reduced 
the incidence of chronic disease and death. There has been a 5.4 percent reduction in 10-
year estimated chronic heart disease risk and a 7.5 percent reduction in five-year estimated 
cardiovascular disease risk.  Smoking incidence has also declined 7.1 percent since the 
start of the program. 
 
• WorkWell, a wellness council, was established by the Lincoln-Lancaster County Health 
Department, funded one- fourth by Preventive Health & Health Services Block Grant 
funds and three-fourths by participating businesses and local health department funds.  
Health department WorkWell staff provides materials and assistance to businesses in 
developing a wellness plan for their employees with measurable goals using best practice 
ideas.  90 businesses employing more than 55,000 workers are offered health risk 
appraisals, education and training by WorkWell and financial incentives provided by their 
employer to achieve smoking cessation and weight control goals.  After seven years of 
WorkWell interventions, the 2004 health risk appraisals showed an obesity rate less than 
half the comparable state and local rate in the general population.  Almost half the 
participating WorkWell employees were getting recommended amouts of physical activity 
on a regular basis, and smoking rates among WorkWell participants dropped from 24% to 
12% after 5 years of the program. 
 
Nevada: 
 
• The Southern Nevada Health District in Clark County, Nevada, implemented a web-based 
program that combines behavior modification tips and resources, the ability to join virtual 
walking groups, and links to community walking groups and events in an easy-to-use and 
free online program. The online walking program logs and tracks participants’ steps or miles 
and displays progress for his or her virtual trek around Nevada. At program onset, 30 percent 
were meeting physical activity guidelines. One year later, 52.2 percent were meeting 
guidelines. 
 

--- Page 16 ---
 
16
• The Nutrition Challenge program was developed as a means to provide nutrition 
education and increase fruit and vegetable consumption among Clark County, Nevada 
residents.  Participants register and log their daily servings of fruits and vegetables and 
visually track their progress on a graph. Each week participants are provided with new 
nutrition information as part of the program. Nineteen percent of eligible participants 
responded to the post-program survey. Of that group, 69% reported that they had 
increased their daily consumption of fruits and vegetables from the beginning of the 
program to the end. Another 47% reported they were eating healthier and an additional 
20% reported initiating healthier behaviors such as losing weight and starting an exercise 
program. 
 
New Hampshire: 
 
• The New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services developed KidPower!, a 
program to increase physical activity for children and their families. The program has 
several components:   
o KidPower! Newsletter: Provides children and families seasonal ideas for being 
more physically active, reducing sedentary time, and simple healthy recipes.  
o KidPower! Pedometer Program: Students receive a pedometer to record their 
daily steps, and other physical activity, in a logbook that includes messages 
about safety, healthy eating, and ideas for increasing physical activity.  
o KidPower! Seasonal Activity Trackers: Designed for preschool through grade 
3 students, trackers remind families that their children need to stay active each 
season, to reduce TV time and the importance of daily physical activity. 
o KidPower! Walk and Wheel Safely: Children are encouraged to walk or bike to 
and from school in groups accompanied by adults. Students living too far from 
school to walk or bike, or in neighborhoods without safe routes, walk at school 
before or after classes or during recess. 
Students increased their physical activity an average of 25 percent over the weeks that 
they used pedometers, according to two years of evaluation. 
 
New Mexico: 
 
• The REACH project in New Mexico and Colorado worked with the Ramah Band of 
Navajo Indians to create partnerships between tribal health programs, tribal leaders and 
nontribal groups to address the rising incidence of breast and cervical cancer among 
American Indian women.  The project developed Mammography Days and transported 
women to the nearest hospital, about 45 miles away.  As a result, 130 women received 
mammograms for the first time in their lives.  Tribal health care providers also received 
training in public health topics, cancer screening techniques, and surveillance methods to 
improve their patient care. 
 
• The Albuquerque Area Indian Health Board, Inc. worked with the Ramah Band of Navajo 
Indians, with funds from CDC, to create a program called Mammography Days to 
encourage more tribal women aged 40 or older living in the pilot community to get 
screened for breast cancer. Mammograms were scheduled for tribal women at a nearby 
hospital. The women were provided with health information that reflected the women’s 

--- Page 17 ---
 
17
tribal culture and language and were transported to the hospital in groups to create social 
support. The program also trained tribal health care providers in public health topics and 
cancer-screening techniques. As a result, 130 women received a mammogram, some for 
the first time in their lives. 
 
• As a result of the REACH 2010 grant, the La Vida Program was created to serve 
Hispanics with or at risk for diabetes by offering diabetes education classes, support 
groups, community outreach, grocery store tours that teach how to read food labels, and a 
restaurant intervention to teach people to make healthy eating choices. The program also 
includes a physical fitness program called Active and Alive that is available at local health 
clubs, home visits, and one-on-one sessions.  After initial involvement in the program, 
Hidalgo Medical Services patients had an average hemoglobin A1c level of 8.2, compared 
with the national average of 9.0 for Hispanics. After 9-12 months of involvement, 
patients’ average A1c levels dropped to 7.6. 
 
• The New Mexico Diabetes Prevention and Control Program developed “Kitchen 
Creations Cooking School,” a four-class series designed to improve meal planning and 
food preparation skills of New Mexicans with diabetes. Participants learn simple meal 
planning strategies and food preparation techniques, as well as tips for reading food labels. 
Hands-on activities and food samplings incorporate many local recipes.  During the past 
four years, the proportion of participants using the Diabetes Food Guide Pyramid for meal 
planning has increased by 183%; there has been a 92% increase in participants eating 
whole grains or beans; a 142% increase in those selecting two or more non-starch 
vegetables at meals; and the practice of reading food labels has increased by 98%. 
 
• The New Mexico Departments of Education and Health launched the Albuquerque Public 
Schools Asthma Program to improve student asthma management using coordinated 
school health funding from CDC’s Division of Adolescent & School Health and in 
cooperation with the American Lung Association and the Albuquerque Public Schools.  
Asthma Program Strategies include: 
o Implementing “Open Airways”, an educational program with proven 
effectiveness in promoting good asthma management, in grades 3-5; 
o Training school nurses and providing asthma education to school staff;  
o Updating school asthma procedures to include best practices and modifying 
policies for culturally sensitivity; 
o Referring students and families without health insurance to New Mexico 
Department of Health Children’s Medical Services; 
o Equipping all school health rooms with asthma-related devices; 
o Contracting with the University of New Mexico’s Center for Regional Studies 
“Tools for Schools” program to train school staff to inspect for and identify air 
quality concerns, which include asthma triggers. 
Absences due to asthma decreased significantly. Overall absences due to asthma went 
from 39% the first year to 26% in year three. 
 
• Suicide is the second leading cause of death among American Indians 15 to 24 years old, 
according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data.  American Indian Life 
Skills Development (the currently available version of the former Zuni Life Skills 

--- Page 18 ---
 
18
Development program) is a school-based suicide prevention curriculum designed to 
address this problem by reducing suicide risk and improving protective factors among 
American Indian adolescents 14 to 19 years old.  The curriculum includes anywhere from 
28 to 56 lesson plans covering topics such as building self-esteem, identifying emotions 
and stress, increasing communication and problem-solving skills, recognizing and 
eliminating self-destructive behavior, learning about suicide, role-playing around suicide 
prevention, and setting personal and community goals.  Students receiving the Zuni Life 
Skills Development curriculum had less feelings of hopelessness compared with the no-
intervention control group (p < .05) and demonstrated a higher level of suicide 
intervention skills compared with the no-intervention control group (p < .004).  The Zuni 
Life Skills Development curriculum was developed with cultural components relevant to 
the people of the Zuni Pueblo in New Mexico and was tested and evaluated with that 
population.  The American Indian Life Skills Development curriculum, an adaptation of 
the Zuni version, has been implemented with a number of other tribes.   
New York: 
• The New York State Department of Health and four New York counties (Broome, 
Chautauqua, Jefferson, Rockland) have Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
funding to implement Steps to a HealthierNY.  Highlights from the results of using an 
integrated Steps approach in four communities in New York State are: eleven schools 
added healthy food items to their menus and removed high fat and high sugar items; 
restaurants now highlight healthier menu items (115 so far); corner stores are stocking a 
wider variety of healthy foods (26 so far); over 46,000 residents engaged in community-
wide physical activity programs; health care providers received needed training in 
diabetes care, tobacco cessation, and weight management (over 1,500 so far); the CDC 
School Health Index, a tool that helps school identify ways to improve their school 
environment for better health, has been completed in 64 schools; and school Health 
Advisory Committees are established in 100 schools enabling long-term attention to 
school health improvements. 
 
• The Steps Program in Broome County, New York, reached families in rural areas by 
implementing a walking program that enrolled more than 50,000 people.  The percentage 
of adults walking for more than 30 minutes on five or more days each week increased 
from 47 percent to nearly 54 percent in one year.  The Program also worked with fifteen 
school districts that together were able to buy healthy foods at lower costs.  As a result, 
fresh fruit and vegetable consumption increased 14 percent in participating schools. 
 
• The Rochester Area Family YMCA and the Steps Program developed and implemented a 
program called “Fit WIC, the Y’s Way.”  A Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) fitness 
class teaches best practices to parents while children play in a Y class.  Families receive 
activity ideas, balls, bean bags and resource guides.  An evaluation of the program showed 
that parents indicated an increase in their own moderate and vigorous physical activity by 
about 10 percent over a six-month period.  Children and adults reported that they 
exercised more often and for longer periods of time at post test. (YMCA.  “YMCA/Steps 
Community Collaborative Projects – Success Stories)  
 

--- Page 19 ---
 
19
• The North Manhattan Start Right Coalition (funded by CDC through the REACH 2010 
initiative) works to promote immunization through existing community programs that 
serve the needs of parents of young children. The program developed a five-part training 
program for community health workers. Between 2002-2006, the program increased the 
immunization rate to 76% for children of all ages enrolled in the program, with 86.5% of 
children up to date by age 3. 
 
• New York began implementing a comprehensive state tobacco control program in 2000.  
Between 2000 and 2006, smoking among middle school students declined by 61 percent, 
(from 10.5 percent to 4.1 percent), and smoking among high school students declined by 
40 percent, (from 27.1 percent to 16.3 percent).  Nationally, over this same time period, 
smoking among middle school students declined by 43 percent and smoking among high 
school students declined by 30 percent.  
 
• The Steps program in Chautauqua County, New York, worked with a local hospital to 
change its policy on asking patients about tobacco use and implementing a two-minute 
tobacco cessation intervention.  Total calls to the New York State Smokers’ Quitline from 
health care provider referrals increased four-fold during 2005-2006, and county data show 
a decrease in smoking rates in Chautauqua County, from nearly 29 percent in 2004 to less 
than 24 percent in 2006.  
 
• The Bronx Health REACH Coalition works with 22 churches to educate local residents 
and empower them to adopt healthy lifestyles.  Through the nutrition and fitness initiative, 
Bronx Health REACH works to improve residents’ access to healthy foods.  As a result, 
New York City schools have switched from whole milk to low fat milk, neighborhood 
grocers carry low-fat milk and healthier snacks, and local restaurants highlight their 
healthy menu options. 
 
• The New York State Department of Health created a state-funded colorectal cancer 
screening program to screen men and women aged 50 and older with inadequate health 
insurance.  Screening kits are distributed to eligible individuals through local partnerships 
involving county health departments, American Cancer Society chapters, hospitals, 
physicians, health care clinics, and individual health care workers. People with a positive 
test receive a complete colon exam, including a colonoscopy, funded by the state. Of the 
44,000 tests completed, almost 1,800 people with positive results required follow-up since 
the start of the program in 1997.  Nearly 1,300 of these individuals received a complete 
colon exam. An additional 630 individuals received screening colonoscopies because of 
personal or family risk factors for colorectal cancer.  Polyps were found and removed in a 
significant number of people, decreasing their risk of getting colorectal cancer. Diagnosis 
of colorectal cancer in 67 people allowed them to quickly enter treatment, increasing their 
survival chances. 
 
• The Broome County the Steps to a HealthierNY program worked with the Office for 
Aging, to field test the Mission Meltaway program in senior centers and expand it the to 
other community sites. Mission Meltaway is a free, eight-week healthy lifestyle program 
that uses a group approach to weight loss and maintenance and builds on the concepts of 
the National Diabetes Education Program called “Small Steps, Big Rewards.”  As a result 

--- Page 20 ---
 
20
of the Mission Meltaway program, over 1,100 participants lost an average of more than 5 
pounds; average waist measurement was reduced, indicating improved weight status; and 
body mass index, an indicator of body fatness, was lowered and some participants reduced 
their disease risk related to weight. 
 
• The Steps Program in Jefferson County partnered with a rural school district to establish a 
School Health Advisory Committee. School employee health promotion interventions 
over two years included after-hours walking groups, classes on healthy eating, and a full 
day devoted to staff health and wellness, courtesy of the Board of Education, as well as 
other activities.  The success of the school employee wellness program allowed the Board 
of Education to waive one month of insurance premiums for all employees, a total of 
almost $300,000 in savings.  Over one hundred district employees have lost a total of 430 
pounds, and there is a documented decrease in expenditures by the district’s self-funded 
health care plan, the Health Insurance Trust, and now its funding is at its highest level 
ever. 
 
• St. Vincent’s Hospital Healthy Heart Program, with funding from the New York State 
Healthy Heart Program, worked with employers in New York, Kings, Queens and 
Richmond counties to create worksite wellness programs and increase opportunities for 
physical activity and access to healthy food at worksites for twenty-four thousand 
employees.  Results from a sample of worksites shows: 
o Two companies negotiated discounts from insurance providers as a direct 
result of participation in this program; 
o A worksite weight management program resulted in almost all participants 
losing weight and most reporting they were eating more fruits and vegetables;  
o One site reported a significant ten-point decrease in average blood pressure of 
participants after one year of a self-monitoring program;  
o Most workers buying a share in community-supported agriculture for the first 
time reported an increase in fruit and vegetable intake as a result;  
o Two sites credit their worksite wellness program with sparing an employee 
serious injury because of their immediate action to seek emergency care when 
extremely high blood pressure was detected as part of their blood pressure 
monitoring program. 
 
• With funding from the New York State Department of Health, St. Vincent’s Hospital 
Healthy Heart Program educated workers in New York City, Queens, Staten Island and 
Brooklyn about stroke.  The Stroke Heroes Act FAST educational program, created by the 
Massachusetts Department of Health, uses the FAST acronym to teach stroke signs and 
symptoms.  Two worksites credit the stroke awareness presentation with saving the life of 
an employee. Both employees avoided serious injury because the stroke awareness 
program helped colleagues recognize the urgency of the situation and the need for 
immediate action. 
 
• With funding from the New York State Health Department, Healthy Heart Program, the 
Wyoming County Health Department worked with the local Department of Social 
Services to organize a wellness committee, create a bulletin board exhibit featuring health 
information, and begin a walking program.  Workers replaced unhealthy snacks with more 

--- Page 21 ---
 
21
fruits and vegetables, installed a water cooler to encourage less soda and high-calorie 
beverage consumption and began having regular ‘salad days’ where employees brought in 
components for a group salad. Many employees also participated in “Walk Across 
America” teams, walking distances equivalent to the distance from the east to west coast 
of the U.S.A.  Sixty-four employees participating in the walking program collectively lost 
over three hundred pounds, lowered their cholesterol levels and walked the equivalent of 
well over twenty-five hundred miles.  Many participants lowered their blood pressure or 
maintained a normal blood pressure. 
 
• New York University Caregiver Intervention (NYUCI) is a counseling and support 
intervention for spouse caregivers that is intended to improve the well-being of caregivers 
and delay the nursing home placement of patients with Alzheimer's disease. The program 
also aims to help spouse caregivers mobilize their social support network and help them 
better adapt to their caregiving role. The program consists of four components: (1) two 
individual counseling sessions of 1 to 3 hours tailored to each caregiver's specific 
situation, (2) four family counseling sessions with the primary caregiver and family 
members selected by that caregiver, (3) encouragement to participate in weekly, locally 
available support groups after participation in the intervention, and (4) ad hoc counseling, 
counseling provided by telephone to caregivers and families whenever needed to help 
them deal with crises and the changing nature of their relative's symptoms. Caregivers 
who received the intervention reported better physical health than members of the 
comparison group, who received resource information on request but did not receive 
individual and family counseling (p < .001). The effect was maintained for 2 years. 
Caregivers also averaged fewer depressive symptoms than members of the comparison 
group, who received resource information on request but did not receive individual and 
family counseling (p < .05). The effect was maintained for 3 years. 
 
North Carolina: 
 
• The Charlotte REACH 2010 Coalition has implemented interventions that focus on 
physical activity, nutrition, smoking cessation, tobacco use prevention, and systems and 
environmental changes to prevent the onset of heart disease and diabetes. As a result, a 
farmer’s market was opened in 2001. Since then, 73% of residents say they are eating 
more fresh fruits and vegetables each day. Also, 72% of residents say they are being more 
physically active and 67% say they have reduced the amount of fat in their diet. 
 
• Cherokee Choices is a CDC funded REACH program working to confront environmental 
and biological factors that put Cherokee people at a higher risk for diabetes. Mentors work 
with elementary school children and staff to develop lesson plans on self-esteem, cultural 
pride, conflict resolution, etc. In addition, nutritionists, dieticians, and fitness workers help 
tribal members participate in activities at their churches and work sites to help them 
reduce stress, eat healthier, and increase physical activity levels. After the implementation 
of this program, 96% of school participants said they know how to make healthier 
choices. 
 
• Prevent Blindness NC (PBNC) and the Children and Youth section of the North Carolina 
Department of Health and Human Services implemented Children’s Vision Screening 

--- Page 22 ---
 
22
Improvement, which offers training and certification for volunteer vision screeners, as 
well as follow up services. It is based on a 3-hour vision screening certification curriculum 
endorsed by the NC Pediatric Vision Screening Task Force. PBNC collaborates directly 
with locally based school nurses who coordinate the mass screenings in each school, assist 
in identifying community volunteers, and conduct referral and follow-up activities for 
children identified as needing care.  School nurse reports indicate that 71% of children 
referred from screening are confirmed as receiving necessary follow-up eye care and 
treatment. 100% of eligible applicants who have been identified as needing eye care but 
cannot afford such care are provided vouchers for comprehensive eye care. 
 
• North Carolina’s Chronic Disease Management Collaborative provides a means for action 
to make rapid changes in delivery of chronic disease care by primary care practices.  The 
Collaborative key partners are the NC Division of Public Health, Chronic Disease and 
Injury Section; the NC Community Health Center Association; and Medical Review of 
NC, the State’s quality improvement organization. In addition to CDC funding for 
categorical state chronic disease programs, funding is provided by the Robert Wood 
Johnson Foundation and the Kate B. Reynolds Charitable Trust.  The Collaborative 
promotes the development of disease registries to track the care of patients with diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and cancer screening and prevention. Tracking patient care has 
resulted in improvement in the delivery of services necessary to prevent the complications 
of chronic disease, such as blood sugar monitoring, eye exams, vaccinations, and blood 
pressure measurement and control.  For example, average A1c levels (a measure of blood 
sugar control) decreased by an amount that is predicted to result in an 8% reduction in 
diabetes deaths, a 6% reduction in heart attacks, a 5% reduction in stroke, a 17% reduction 
in amputations, and a 10% reduction in renal failure. The three year gross cost savings 
estimates for a sample of 2,745 patients are $957,493. 
 
• The North Carolina chronic disease section expanded on an existing pilot program to 
collaborate with important state partners, including North Carolina’s Medicaid managed 
care program, North Carolina Area Health Education Centers, the University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine and the state’s primary care specialty societies, in an 
initiative designed to improve the quality performance of primary care practices. The 
initiative is based on the Chronic Care Model and emphasizes methods such as the use of 
Quality Improvement Coordinators working with individual practices, an emphasis on 
data collection on common measures, collaborative learning, electronic registries, 
practice-wide care protocols, and strategies to support patient self-management efforts. 
Patient health outcomes improved. The percent of patients meeting important goals for 
diabetes control increased by a third and those meeting goals for cholesterol control 
increased by over twenty-five percent. 
 
• The Physical Activity and Nutrition Branch of the North Carolina Department of Health 
and local partners created the Eat Smart, Move More - Maintain, Don’t Gain Holiday 
Challenge to help residents stem the weight gain that often occurs over the holidays.  
Local health departments and other partners implement the campaign each year in 
worksites and community sites with the help of local businesses and organizations.  This 
free, six-week challenge provides weekly emailed newsletters containing tips for 
managing holiday stress, ideas for fitting in physical activity during the busy season, and 

--- Page 23 ---
 
23
resources for cooking quick and easy meals when time is short. A calorie counter, food 
log and activity log are also available to help people track their progress and radio 
commercials promote the challenge. As a result, eighty-four percent of participants 
reported maintaining their weight. Of those who did not maintain their weight, many 
actually lost excess weight. 
 
North Dakota:  
 
• The North Dakota Diabetes Prevention and Control Program and Blue Cross Blue Shield 
of North Dakota (BCBSND) formed a cooperative partnership to design a system to 
measure the level of care for diabetes patients and track five annual health care services 
office visits, hemoglobin A1C testing, dilated eye exams, lipid profiles, and nephropathy 
assessments. These services help prevent complications such as blindness, amputations, 
heart attack and stroke.  Plan members with diabetes were less likely to have hospital 
admissions and emergency room visits following the start of the program.  The program, 
which cost approximately $300,000, saved an estimated $9 million over three years – 
about a 30 to 1 return on investment. 
 
Ohio: 
 
• Researchers at Ohio State University recruited 60 women in their forties for a 12-week 
walking program that took place on the college’s campus. At 3 months, the intervention 
group saw a 1 percent decrease in body mass index (BMI), a 3.4 percent decrease in 
hypertension, a 3 percent decrease in cholesterol, and a 5.5 percent decrease in glucose. 
(Haines DJ, Davis L, Rancour P, Robinson M, Neel-Wilson T, Wagner S. 2007. A pilot 
intervention to promote walking and wellness and to improve the health of college faculty 
and staff. J Am Col Health 55(4):219-25.) 
 
• Local health officials responded to the outbreak of H1N1 in Greater Cleveland/Cuyahoga 
County by coordinating a group of local preparedness leaders including police and fire 
department, emergency coordinators from area hospitals, infectious disease physicians, 
the Cuyahoga County Coroner and the Cuyahoga County Emergency Manager. One of the 
most important functions of the local health department was to make sure that up to date 
and accurate information was provided to the public and community leaders. Frequent 
conference calls were held with community partners from hospitals, nursing homes, safety 
forces, schools and universities, daycares and businesses. A regular email briefing was 
established for local elected officials. In short order, local health officials activated 
response plans, mobilized staff for surge capacity, assured continuity of normal daily 
operations at the health department, and established a link to the media and the public to 
provide trusted information. These actions demonstrated the formal integration of the 
local health department as an essential partner in the community emergency response 
system. 
 
Oklahoma: 
 

--- Page 24 ---
 
24
• The Steps Program of the Cherokee Nation in Oklahoma helped schools reduce tobacco 
use by implementing the School Health Index (SHI) and creating a healthier school 
environment for American Indian youth.  In 2004, the Program provided SHI training to 
65 school administrators, teachers, staff, and partner organizations.  As a result, nine 
schools developed and implemented 24/7 tobacco-free environment policies.  All 19 
schools with a predominantly American Indian student enrollment made other changes in 
the school, including developing wellness policies, offering healthier food choices in 
cafeterias and vending machines, and providing better lighting and access to exercise 
facilities after school. 
 
• The Choctaw Nation Core Capacity Building Program has successfully worked with its 
partners to create 12 community coalitions within the 11 counties of the Choctaw Nation 
of Oklahoma.  These coalitions are raising awareness about heart disease prevention, 
improving access to care, and assessing the health needs of each community.  As a result 
of the Coalition’s partnerships with local community and public health groups, the 
Choctaw Nation Recovery Center added questions about heart health to its patient intake 
forms and follow-up interviews.  The Coalition partnered with Colorado State 
University’s Tri-Ethnic Center to create a survey to assess communities’ readiness to 
address the health issues identified in the needs assessment surveys.   They also partnered 
with the Oklahoma State Department of Health to link the state’s death certificate 
database with the Indian Health Service Patient Registration database. This linkage will 
help to correct the problem of American Indians being misclassified as members of other 
races on their death certificates (which happens about one-third of the time). 
 
• Oklahoma State Department of Health Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection 
Program, the Oklahoma Health Care Authority, and the Cherokee and Kaw Nations Breast 
and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Programs created Oklahoma Cares to provide 
assistance to low income, uninsured Oklahoma women meeting eligibility guidelines who 
have an abnormal breast or cervical test result. Through Oklahoma Cares these women 
obtain access to Medicaid coverage of diagnosis and treatment services for breast or 
cervical cancer, receiving a full scope of Medicaid benefits until they no longer need 
cancer treatment. The Take Charge! outreach effort is expanding the network to 
previously non-funded providers so that more women have access to the services they 
need. Screening rates have improved by about fifteen percent for low income or uninsured 
women fifty and older which has likely increased the early detection of these cancers. 
Over nine thousand women have been served by the program and over a thousand have 
received treatment for cancer or pre-cancerous conditions. 
 
Oregon: 
 
• The Oregon Public Employees Benefits Board (PEBB), which manages health benefits for 
state employees, and the Oregon Physical Activity and Nutrition Program developed the 
Walking Well Program to encourage worksite wellness.  Employees completed online 
health risk assessments before registering for the program.  Registered participants set 
personal health goals and received a pedometer and educational materials on walking for 
wellness. PEBB provided motivational messages and recognized successes throughout the 

--- Page 25 ---
 
25
program.  More than two thirds of those completing the follow-up survey increased their 
physical activity and plan to continue.  The number of participants meeting the CDC 
recommendation for moderate or vigorous physical activity increased by 24%.  Nearly 
two-thirds of the participants reported making progress toward meeting their personal 
health goals. 
 
Pennsylvania: 
 
• In 2004, the Food Trust in Philadelphia, PA, in partnership with The Reinvestment Fund 
and the Greater Philadelphia Urban Affairs Coalition, identified a strong need for 
government investment to finance supermarkets, grocery stores, and other healthy food 
retailers in underserved communities. This led to the first statewide fresh food financing 
initiative. The Pennsylvania Legislature allocated $10 million in its annual appropriations 
in 2004, with additional funds allocated in 2005 and 2006, to establish a grant and loan 
program to encourage supermarket development in underserved areas. The Reinvestment 
Fund leveraged the investment to create a $120 million initiative composed of state 
dollars, federal tax credit dollars, and private investments. To date, the initiative has 
provided $63.3 million in grants and loans for healthy retail projects, resulting in the 
creation of and improvements to 68 stores that offer fresh foods. These projects have 
generating 3,734 jobs and 1.44 million square feet of floor space.2 It is now seen as a 
model and is being replicated in other US communities.3 
 
• The Philadelphia Department of Public Health Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention 
Program provides complete case management services from testing children to 
remediating the lead hazards in the home. Outreach and Education are key components. 
The Program works with many community groups and other City, State, and Federal 
agencies to coordinate efforts. The Program works to assure that children are safe at home 
and at childcare, foster care, and in school. The Program works with local legislators to 
pass laws for primary prevention.  Prevalence rates (children with elevated lead test levels 
of 10ug/dl or higher) have dropped steadily from a high of over 80% in 1989 to less than 
4% in 2008.  In 1989, over 30,000 children tested had what we now know to be elevated 
lead levels. Last year, that number was down to 1,000. 
 
• Penn State Cooperative Extension and the Pennsylvania Department of Health have 
collaborated for several years to implement the StrongWomen Program which applies the 
research on the benefits of strength training for older women to a community-based 
program using a supportive approach to help middle-aged and older women make lifestyle 
changes in exercise and eating habits.  Sixty percent of participating women increased 
their fitness ability as measured by a fitness test, a benefit to their bones and cost-effective 
for prevention of other chronic diseases as noted in a recent study of community-based 
physical activity programs. A majority of women completing the program report 
                                                 
2 Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative. Providing Healthy Food Choices to Pennsylvania’s 
Communities. Available at: www.thefoodtrust.org/pdf/2009FFFI.pdf. Accessed May 1, 2009. 
3 Cohen L, Iton A, Davis R, Rodriguez S. Prevention Institute.  A Time of Opportunity: Local Solutions to 
Reduce Inequities in Health and Safety. May 2009. 

--- Page 26 ---
 
26
improved eating habits and increased selection of healthy, bone-building foods and many 
also reported better health and feeling physically stronger. 
 
• Penn Resilience Training for College Students is a brief prevention program for freshmen 
university students at risk for depression.  The manual-based program helps participants to 
acquire the following skills: (1) learn the relationship between thoughts, feelings, and 
behaviors; (2) identify automatic negative thoughts and underlying beliefs; (3) use 
evidence to question and dispute automatic negative thoughts and irrational beliefs; (4) 
replace automatic negative thoughts with more constructive interpretations, beliefs, and 
behaviors; (5) apply behavioral activation strategies; (6) build interpersonal skills; (7) 
manage stress; and (8) generalize these skills to new and relevant situations. In one study, 
19% of students in the intervention group had moderate depressive episodes, compared 
with 31% of students who took the questionnaires and had the diagnostic interviews but 
did not participate in the workshop (p < .03).  In another study, results of the short self-
report LIFE measures of depression showed that the students in the intervention group had 
significantly lower levels of depression compared with students who took the 
questionnaires and had diagnostic interviews but did not participate in the workshop. 
Effect size for this finding was large (Cohen's d = 0.50). 
 
Rhode Island: 
• In Pawtucket, Rhode Island, the Pawtucket Heart Health Program conducted an 
intervention to educate 71,000 people about heart disease through a mass media campaign 
and community programs. Five years into the intervention, the risks for cardiovascular 
disease and coronary heart disease had decreased by 16 percent among members of the 
randomly selected intervention population. (Carleton RA, Lasater TM, Assaf AR, 
Feldman HA, McKinlay S. 1995. The Pawtucket Heart Health Program: community 
changes in cardiovascular risk factors and projected disease risk. Am J Public Health 
85(6):777-85.) 
 
• Vaccinate Before You Graduate (VBYG) is a free adolescent vaccination “catch-up” 
program for 12th grade students in Rhode Island schools. The program offers the 
opportunity for students to receive new vaccines and “catch-up” on vaccinations they may 
have missed. By working with school systems the Rhode Island Department of Health 
attempts to reach the majority of youth while they are still enrolled in school and eligible 
for free vaccine through the state’s Vaccine for Children’s Program. VBYG is now 
finishing its seventh year, and has vaccinated over 11,000 twelfth grade students in 79 
schools. In 2007-2008, the program vaccinated over 1,500 students in 69 high schools and 
administered 4,143 shots. 
 
• To address screening barriers, the Rhode Island Department of Health Women’s Cancer 
Screening Program partners with local hospitals, the American Cancer Society, Blue 
Cross Blue Shield of RI, Wal-Mart, and Stop & Shop to heighten uninsured women’s 
awareness of and increase their access to screening for breast cancer.  Cancer program 
staff enrolls eligible women, assists with case management activities and talks with each 
participant about additional screening services for cervical cancer available through the 
program. They also coordinate billing for the hospital and radiology facility which agrees 

--- Page 27 ---
 
27
to accept program reimbursement rates for the services provided.  The partner program 
generated over 1,800 additional screenings at sixteen free screening events coordinated at 
three different hospitals, and eleven breast cancers were diagnosed. 
 
South Carolina: 
 
• To overcome health disparities, the REACH 2010 Charleston and Georgetown Diabetes 
Coalition has developed a comprehensive community action plan that includes walk-talk 
groups, home and telephone visits, educational sessions, health care visits, health and 
information fairs, support groups, grocery store tours, and Internet access at local public 
libraries. From 1999-2004, the percentage of African Americans who had their blood 
sugar level checked annually increased from 77% to 97%, while the percentage who had 
their blood cholesterol level checked increased from 47% to 81%. Kidney testing 
increased from 13% to 53% and foot exams increased from 64% to 97%. Additionally, 
emergency room visits decreased by about 50% for people who have diabetes but do not 
have health insurance. 
 
• CDC “Core” PHISPP injury and violence prevention funding is critical for sustaining 
services of the Division of Injury and Violence Prevention (DIVP) in the South Carolina 
Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC).   Those services include 
fatal and non-fatal injury surveillance, violent death reporting, child death review, 
strategic planning, and education and prevention activities.  The core funding also 
provides a stable base from which the Division can work to acquire supplemental funding 
for valuable and successful injury and violence prevention programs.  An important 
SCDHEC DIVP prevention program is the SC Residential Fire Injury Prevention 
Program, funded by CDC’s Smoke Alarm Installation and Fire Safety Education (SAIFE) 
program.  In 2008, four fires were reported in homes that participated in the SC 
Department of Health and Environmental Control's Residential Fire Injury Prevention 
Program and eleven lives, eight months to 89 years of age, were saved in those events.  In 
each home, a smoke alarm provided through the SC Residential Fire Injury Prevention 
Program alerted residents of fire and everyone escaped without injury.  Also, local fire 
departments were quickly notified and minimal damage to the homes was reported. 
 
Tennessee: 
 
• The Nashville Health Disparities Coalition developed a community action plan as a part of 
the REACH 2010 initiative to address health disparities among African Americans who 
have or are at risk of developing diabetes, heart disease, or high blood pressure. After the 
implementation of the plan in 2000, more than 4,000 people have been screened for 
diabetes, heart disease, and associated risk factors. 
 
• The Urban League of Greater Chattanooga Tennessee implemented a pilot adaptation of 
an evaluated National Institutes of Health healthy weight program called Sisters Together: 
Move More, Eat Better which is designed to appeal to African American women, a 
population group with a high rate of obesity. The main objective was to implement a 

--- Page 28 ---
 
28
sustainable program so that many more African American women would be able to reach 
fitness and nutrition goals following the pilot implementation. Funding was provided by 
the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Tennessee Health Foundation, Unum, a Tennessee-based 
insurance company, the Lyndhurst Foundation, and the Tennessee Department of Health. 
All participants reported improved eating habits and increased weekly physical activity, 
and almost a third of the participants lowered their body mass index.  
 
Texas: 
 
• The REACH Promotora Community Coalition developed a community action plan that 
use promotores (promoters) with the same socioeconomic background, language, and 
culture as the community they serve to promote healthy behaviors. As a result, moderate 
walking increased by 25% among community residents. Before the intervention, baseline 
data showed that 24.5% of patients with diabetes drank whole milk. Afterward, patients 
reported a 14% decrease in their consumption of whole milk. 
 
• In Austin, Texas, the Steps Program established a worksite wellness program with Capital 
Metro.  Employees received health assessments and health action plans.  Employee 
absences decreased more than 44 percent during 2004-2006, and the use of healthy choice 
options in the cafeteria increased 172 percent.  Annual health care costs increased by nine 
percent during 2004-2005, compared with 27 percent during 2003-2004. 
 
 
 
• PROSPECT (Prevention of Suicide in Primary Care Elderly: Collaborative Trial) aims to 
prevent suicide among older primary care patients by reducing suicidal ideation and 
depression. The intervention components are: (1) recognition of depression and suicide 
ideation by primary care physicians, (2) application of a treatment algorithm for geriatric 
depression in the primary care setting, and (3) treatment management by health specialists 
(e.g., nurses, social workers, and psychologists). The treatment algorithm assists primary 
care physicians in making appropriate care choices during the acute, continuation, and 
maintenance phases of treatment based on depression treatment guidelines for older 
patients from the American Psychiatric Association, the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality, and the Texas Department of Mental Health. In a randomized controlled trial 
comparing PROSPECT with treatment as usual, patients with major depression in 
PROSPECT experienced greater decreases in depression between baseline and 12 months 
(p < .001). PROSPECT patients also were more likely to experience remission and to have 
earlier remission. With remission defined as an HDRS score of less than 10, 40% of the 
PROSPECT patients with major depression had a cumulative probability of remission at 4 
months, compared with 23% of patients receiving usual treatment. Unadjusted rates of 
suicidal ideation decreased 12.9% among patients receiving PROSPECT (from 29.4% to 
16.5%), compared with a 3.0% decrease (from 20.1% to 17.1%) among patients receiving 
treatment as usual (p = .01). 
Utah: 

--- Page 29 ---
 
29
• The Utah Diabetes Prevention and Control Program, part of the Utah Department of 
Health, works with public and private health care providers to develop and manage 
diabetes self-management courses.  People with diabetes who have completed one of the 
diabetes self-management courses show improved blood sugar control. Over 70% monitor 
their blood sugar levels regularly and correctly.  Nearly two-thirds of the participants are 
following recommended meal plans.  Nearly two-thirds of the participants report that they 
exercise regularly. 
 
• The Utah Tobacco Prevention and Control Program then worked with the Department of 
Workforce Services to enable Health Program Representatives to identify pregnant 
women smokers from Medicaid eligibility encounter information. Once identified, the 
representatives contact pregnant smokers and offer appropriate tobacco cessation services 
they are eligible for, such as nicotine replacement or other medications and cessation 
counseling through contracted agencies in addition to standard Utah Tobacco Quit Line 
services. Of those pregnant women participating in this program over 16% quit and more 
than a third reduced their use of tobacco. 
Virginia: 
• The Virginia Diabetes Prevention and Control Program implemented Dining with 
Diabetes, a tested program offering nutrition education and practical hands-on meal 
planning experience to adults with diabetes, through a contract with Virginia Cooperative 
Extension. Over half of the participants achieved a lower A1C level which means their 
blood sugar was better-controlled. For every percentage point drop in this test measure the 
risk of eye, kidney and nerve disease is reduced by forty percent. Over ten percent of 
participants reduced their blood pressure to an acceptable level. 
Washington: 
• The Briggs Community YMCA worked with the Steps Program to implement a program 
called “Steps that Count.”  Twenty-three worksite teams from city, county and state 
agencies, in addition to businesses, schools and churches were created in order to increase 
physical activity.  Informational packets, self-tracking forms and pedometers were 
distributed.  Overall, employees logged over 21 million steps in the three-month program, 
and the program continued to grow. 
 
• In the Seattle and King County areas, the REACH 2010 Coalition implemented an 
intervention plan to prevent diabetes among minority communities. The percentage of 
people participating in the interventions who were able to keep their blood sugar level 
under control increased from 48% to 56%. The percentage of participants who said they 
were confident they could stick to their diet increased from 56% to 69%. The percentage 
of participants who reported being more physically active increased from 75% to 86%. 
 
• The Washington State Tobacco Prevention and Control program was implemented in 
1999. Since the program began, adult smoking has declined by 30 percent, from 22.4 
percent in 1999 to 16.5 percent in 2007, one of the lowest smoking rates in the country.  

--- Page 30 ---
 
30
Washington’s dramatic decline in adult smoking translates to more than 240,000 fewer 
smokers in the state, saving about $2.1 billion in future health care costs. 
 
• A partnership between Public Health – Seattle & King County and the Seattle Housing 
Authority built environmentally‐friendly homes with special features to reduce asthma 
triggers for low‐income public housing residents. Improvements costing $5,000 to $7,000 
in housing design, materials and construction dramatically reduced asthma triggers, 
symptoms and exacerbations These improvements include insulated and well‐sealed 
foundations, special ventilation, installation of energy‐efficient argon windows, 
minimization of carpeting, and use of low‐emission materials with minimal known asthma 
triggers, in place of the more common particle‐board cupboards that often emit volatile 
compounds.  Children in these homes have 70 percent more symptom‐free days than in 
their previous homes, which translates into 138 more days without symptoms per year. 
They had a 67% reduction in the need for urgent clinical care. 
 
• The King County (Washington) Children's Health Initiative (CHI) is a local approach to 
improve the health of low-income children. To ensure that all children in King County 
receive needed preventive health care services, CHI provides support in obtaining health 
care coverage and coordination in finding the right health care home.  In the clinics with 
CHI-contracted care coordinators, the rates for children receiving preventive services 
increased significantly over this same time period. For example, immunization increased 
at rates between 6% and 79% at the six agencies served by care coordinators and early 
oral health visits increased at rates ranging from 42% to 257%. Family interviews showed: 
families with CHI reported more confidence in accessing needed health services for their 
children; families with CHI reported greater ease in accessing needed health services for 
their children; none of the interviewed families with CHI reported missing more than four 
days of school or work due to a child’s illness.  
 
• In Seattle King County’s Healthy Homes program, Community Health Workers visit 
low‐income children with asthma, conduct a home environmental assessment to identify 
asthma triggers and assess caretaker’s knowledge and management of asthma. The CHW 
supports families in reducing triggers and improving asthma self management through 
follow‐up visits, provides allergen control resources, makes referrals to additional 
resources and links families to medical homes. Home visits make a big impact on asthma 
outcomes. Compared to a comparison group, children in who received home visits had 
nearly a month’s worth of days (25 fewer days) per year with asthma symptoms. Urgent 
health care decreased by 65% in the home visit group (much more than the 20% decrease 
in the comparison group). Children who received home visits had fewer symptoms and 
urgent health care use even when compared to other children who received intensive 
asthma education and care coordination by a clinic asthma nurse.  In 2003, the Secretary 
of the US Department of Health and Human Services recognized the program with its 
“Innovation in Prevention” Award. In 2005, the program received the US EPA Children’s 
Environmental Health Excellence Award.  
 
• In 2005 Public Health-Seattle & King County received a demonstration grant from the 
CDC to develop a replicable system for recruiting, educating and screening under-served 

--- Page 31 ---
 
31
populations for colorectal cancer in a primary care setting with other chronic disease 
screening programs. Working with community partners, Public Health developed: tailored 
education materials and messages; a client education and follow-up protocol that 
improved the return rate of the Fecal Occult Blood Test (home test) from an unknown or 
2-3% to 63%; a patient navigation system to support client completion of colonoscopies 
that improved compliance from “nearly always failed” to 92% completed; and various 
clinic systems to assure clients are screened. Over 2,000 clients were screened. One 
client’s cancer was detected early enough for effective treatment and 133 people with 
polyps that had the potential to become cancer were treated. This program served as 
model for a national expansion of the colorectal screening program in July 2009. 
 
• Public Health – Seattle & King County is partnering with community service providers 
and the Seattle Housing Authority to increase walking at a multi-cultural public housing 
site. Interventions include walking groups, improving walking routes, providing 
information about walking options, and enhancing pedestrian safety through advocacy that 
resulted in restrictions on street parking to improve car and pedestrian visibility, improved 
traffic signals, relocation of a school bus stop to a safer location, installation of radar 
speed monitors on a busy arterial street, and safety enhancements at a busy intersection 
where traffic-related injuries had occurred. Walking has increased among walking group 
participants from 65 to 108 minutes per day. The proportion reporting being at least 
moderately active for at least 150 minutes per week has increased from 62% to 81%. 
 
• The [Seattle-King County] Nurse Family Partnership is an evidence-based nurse home 
visitation program that has been shown to positively impact the lives of first time, low 
income mothers and their children. In randomized control trials, NFP mothers were more 
likely to have improved prenatal health, fewer subsequent pregnancies and greater 
intervals between births. NFP mothers had increased maternal employment and children 
born to mothers served by NFP had fewer childhood injuries and improved school 
readiness.  NFP visits begin as early in pregnancy as possible and continue until the child 
reaches two years of age. Services are delivered by BSN prepared Public Health Nurses. 
Cost benefit analyses of NFP services show that the program saves $5.70 for every dollar 
invested.  In a recent study looking at savings to the criminal justice system, NFP was 
shown to save $27,105 per family in crime reduction alone. 
 
• Steps to Health King County was one of 40 community-level initiatives funded in 2003 as 
part of the Steps to a HealthierUS initiative. Some highlights include:  
o Healthy Sundays ‐ Diabetes and cardiovascular screening education in 
churches. 83% of participants met their nutritional and physical activity action 
plan goals at 6 months.  
o Strong Kids Strong Teens – Community‐based physical activity and nutrition 
program for overweight and at risk of overweight youth.  Resulted in an 11% 
increase in families with < 3 hours computer/TV time per day and a 35% 
increase in the number of days/week with vigorous exercise.  
o Fuel and Play the Healthy Way ‐Training for child care providers to increase 
healthy eating and physical activity in child care settings.  82% had made at 
least one change in the food they serve (4‐months after the training). 76% had 

--- Page 32 ---
 
32
made at least one change in their physical activities (4‐6 months after the 
training). 
 
• The Seattle, Tukwila, and Highline School Districts in Washington State implemented a 
Staff Walking Challenge where staff members formed teams and competed to log the 
most physical activity.  The challenged resulted in a 60% increase in those reporting 
moderate exercise 4+ days per week (from 38% to 61% among participants during the 
program). 
 
• “Eat Better, Feel Better” (EBFB) is a comprehensive nutrition education and physical 
activity pilot program that integrates nutrition educators into the life of a Seattle public 
school to improve nutrition and physical activity curricula, family activities and school 
environments. As a result: Principals reported that students ate more fresh fruits and 
vegetables and were willing to try new foods; they also reported that there was an increase 
in the variety of physical activities available for students; parents reported changes in their 
own eating behaviors as a result of EBFB information and increased interest in their 
students in eating healthier; parents/guardians reported that their children wanted to eat 
more fruits and vegetables; half of the parents interviewed said their child had asked them 
to buy more fruits and vegetables, including new items that had been introduced at 
schools; the proportion of students who reported higher levels of physical activity 
increased significantly in the EBFB intervention schools and did not increase significantly 
in the control schools. 
 
• The Yakima Valley Farm Workers Clinic used funding from a Health Resources and 
Services Administration grant to establish the Yakima Valley Farm Workers Clinic 
Asthma Project a home-visiting program employing bi-lingual, paraprofessional asthma 
educators to conduct home visits with residents who have asthma.  Visits include 
education on the importance of using medicines and medical equipment correctly, 
following medical recommendations, and minimizing environmental triggers, such as dust 
mites and cigarette smoke, that make asthma worse.  This project documented positive 
results for clients who had at least five home visits: 
o A seventy percent reduction in hospital and emergency department visits due 
to asthma attacks for high risk clients; 
o A reduction in exposure to environmental factors that contribute to asthma 
attacks by up to seventy percent; 
o Students who participated in asthma education in the home had over fifty 
percent fewer absences than students who did not. 
 
• The Cowlitz County Health Department Immunization Program coordinator initiated 
extensive collaborative relationships with providers in order to provide technical support, 
data, and education on the topic of recommended practices for vaccine programs for 
children. This local health department effort to improve immunization practices achieved: 
an increase of over sixty percent in the overall vaccination rate for kindergarten students 
in Castle Rock Schools and 100% provider compliance with best practices for storage, 
handling, and administration of vaccines.   
 
West Virginia: 

--- Page 33 ---
 
33
 
• West Virginia has the highest adult smoking rate in the country (2009) and tobacco use 
costs the state well over a billion for health care and another billion in lost productivity 
annually. The Division of Tobacco Prevention implements a research-based, 
comprehensive tobacco control program which included: integrated dual regional tobacco 
prevention networks; community-based programs and their associated networks; youth 
and school programs and their associated networks; eliminating exposure to secondhand 
smoke; eliminating health disparities; cessation services, including a tobacco quitline; 
specifically-targeted media support; and evaluation. All of West Virginia’s fifty-five 
counties now have a clean indoor air regulation and a representative tobacco prevention 
coalition.  Almost all counties now have regulations requiring restaurants to be smoke-
free.  The Tobacco quitline has a documented quit rate of thirty-two percent and a return 
on investment for quitline services and associated media support of more than $7 for 
every $1 spent. 
 
• The West Virginia Division of Tobacco Prevention has several teen tobacco prevention 
efforts, including the Raze youth empowerment campaign, a regional network of full-time 
educational area coordinators specifically targeting the high teen tobacco use-rates, Not-
On-Tobacco, a teen tobacco cessation program developed by the University of West 
Virginia Prevention Research Center disseminated by the American Lung Association and 
companion efforts. The Regional Tobacco Prevention Specialist network is a group of 
eight specialists located around the State who work full- time facilitating youth tobacco 
prevention.  The Not-On-Tobacco teen tobacco cessation program achieved a 34% quit 
rate and a 72% reduction in tobacco use over a single school year. The percentage of high 
school students who report they’ve never used tobacco increased by more than fifty 
percent over seven years of programming. 
 
• For several years the West Virginia University Office of Health Services Research has 
worked with Roane County Family Health Care, a federally qualified health center, to 
monitor and improve the quality of care provided to people with diabetes. A strong 
partnership with the West Virginia Diabetes Prevention and Control Program enables the 
University to provide Roane County Family Health Care health professionals and staff 
with education in chronic disease management. There has been significant improvement 
in health-related measures for the health center’s patients with diabetes: the average 
improvement in measures of blood sugar control is an amount estimated to decrease 
amputations by over 8% and micro-vascular disease by almost the same amount; and 
average blood cholesterol among patients has improved by five percent. 
(8/18/09) 
